Update community briefs, add portal survey analysis (#24)
nf-osi/nf-osi-research.github.io: portal-survey-2023.Rmd

    affiliation_url: https://sagebionetworks.org/
    orcid_id: 0000-0002-1775-3645
  - name: Christina Conrad
    url: https://github.com/cconrad8
    affiliation: Sage Bionetworks
    affiliation_url: https://sagebionetworks.org/
  - name: Robert Allaway
    url: https://github.com/allaway
    affiliation: Sage Bionetworks
    affiliation_url: https://sagebionetworks.org/
    orcid_id: 0000-0003-3573-3565
date: "`r Sys.Date()`"
output: distill::distill_article
---

```{r setup, include=FALSE}
knitr::opts_chunk$set(echo = FALSE)
library(dplyr)
library(tidyr)
library(ggplot2)
library(gt)
library(googlesheets4)
library(tidygraph)
library(ggraph)

source("R/circlepack.R")
```

```{r, include=FALSE}
sheet_id <- "1mZ6_XzC1d82cCl8uBqBjSDvIMo7-QN4Q2_FMIifbmkA"
raw <- googlesheets4::read_sheet(ss = sheet_id)

```

```{r, echo=F}
# users
emails <- raw %>%
  pull(`Email Address`) %>%
  unique() 

deid <- setNames(1:length(emails), emails)
survey <- raw %>%
  mutate(id = deid[`Email Address`]) %>%
  select(-c(`Email Address`))

# use only most recent response where some users submitted multiple responses
survey <- survey %>% 
   group_by(id)  %>%
   top_n(n = 1, Timestamp)
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Summary:
```

Reviewer: Suggest adding a summary of the main findings

Reviewer: Also suggest adding a "table of contents"

## Introduction

Since 2015, the NF-OSI data platform has continued to grow and is now the entrypoint to over a hundred research studies for the Neurofibromatosis (NF) research community.

> Eight years later, with the support of the Neurofibromatosis Therapeutic Acceleration Program (NTAP), we surveyed NF community members on the experience of **data findability, sharing, and reuse** through the NF Data Portal. The survey aimed evaluate pain points or barriers in these three key areas to understand where the most impactful improvements could be made. 

Author: Added

## Results and Analysis

### Respondent profiles
```{r fig-respondent-type, fig.cap="Demographic representation of survey respondents", layout="l-body-outset", fig.width=9, fig.height=7, echo=F}

# Format labels
survey$`What is your professional title?` <- gsub("Bioinformatician/computational biologist", "Bioinformatician\n/ comp. biologist", survey$`What is your professional title?`)
survey$`What is your professional title?` <- gsub("Bench researcher/staff scientist", "Bench researcher\n/ staff scientist", survey$`What is your professional title?`)
type_representation(`What is your professional title?`, survey)

```
Though the number of respondents (*n=`r nrow(survey)`*) is a modest sample size, respondents do nevertheless represent different types of users. 
Figure \@ref(fig:fig-respondent-type) summarizes the relative abundance of six demographic types. 
Because respondents could indicate more than one demographic type, a statistic of 54% here should be interpreted to mean that 54% of the responses represented the "Principal Investigator" profile. 

> That the survey has such large representation of Principal Investigator (PIs), more than for any other type of user, is encouraging. 

Author: Applied

These are community constituents who have significant say in how research should be done, e.g. how to both obtain and share data for a study.

> On the other hand, there are several caveats in the respondent profile that should be noted. 

Author: Applied

> First is the relatively low percentage of bioinformaticians/computational biologists, which would be the demographic expected to be doing the practical, hands-on reuse of data. 

Author: Applied

This proportion for bioinformaticians/computational biologists is also about the same as a [previous RFC survey](https://nf-osi.github.io/research/rfc-brief.html#respondent-profiles). 

> A data portal should arguably see *over-representation* of bioinformaticians in its userbase, suggesting that the Portal either needs to have more bioinformatician users or increase survey engagement for this group. 

Author: This part was moved to later discussion

<!-- read: computational people may fill out surveys at a lower rate -->
The second issue is that the survey question did not adequately admit additional demographics. 

> One other type of user that should perhaps have been captured is the "rare disease patient or patient advocate". 

Author: Moved

  tidyr::pivot_longer(cols = !id, names_to = "area", values_to = "rating")

area_regex <- "(ability to \\w+)"
issue_regex <-"(?<=\\[).+?(?=\\])"

tidy_survey_ordinal <- survey %>% 
  select(contains("sort")) %>%
  tidyr::pivot_longer(cols = !id, names_to = "area_issue", values_to = "response") %>%
  mutate(area = regmatches(area_issue, regexpr(area_regex, area_issue, perl = T)),
         issue = regmatches(area_issue, regexpr(issue_regex, area_issue, perl = T)))

grouped_bar <- function(data) {
  
  ggplot(data, aes(x = issue, y = n, fill = response)) +
       geom_bar(stat="identity") +
  scale_fill_manual(values = c("#E64B35FF",  "orange", "#4DBBD5FF", "gray")) +
  theme_minimal() +
  xlab("") +
  ylab("Number of responses") +
  theme(axis.text.x = element_text(angle = 45, vjust = 1, hjust=1),
        plot.margin = margin(3, 1, 0.4, 1, "cm")) # need generous left margin for long text
}

```

### Data findability

Data discovery is an important antecedent to data reuse. 
The first survey component asked about issues community users might encounter when trying to **find** data through the NF Data Portal. 
 

> Of several issues that might hamper findability, Figure \@ref(fig:fig-findability) indicates that a confusing user interface had the most severe effect, though poor search functionality was also detrimental. 

Author: Too verbose

> Of several issues that might hamper findability, Figure \@ref(fig:fig-findability) indicates that a confusing user interface had the most severe effect, though poor search functionality was also detrimental. 

Reviewer: @anngvu Since there is a reason behind making this section more verbose, I thought I will lay out the rationale here. Here I have parsed out two different observations from the analysis and plots taken together. From the next sentence and the plots, it looked like almost half or greater than half of the respondents had mentioned that finding data was not an issue for them. This observation does not come through in the analysis and discussion as written currently. 
Additionally, I think adding quants more explicitly is important for any analysis. So I suggested adding actual numbers here. 
Of course these are just suggestions, so please feel free to take it or leave it as you prefer.

> Half or nearly half of users found it "hard" or "impossible" to find data because of these two issues. 

Author: Think this is important to keep

> Half or nearly half of users found it "hard" or "impossible" to find data because of these two issues. 

Reviewer: This was removed since it was added to the previous suggested edits.

Within this area, there were two quite different potential issues: the technical issue of transfer capacity versus the more business-operational issue of dealing with an embargo period. 
The first has evidence of being the more problematic one, as shown in Figure \@ref(fig:fig-reuse), though it seems both affected a minority of users.

```{r fig-reuse, fig.cap="Caption", layout="l-body-outset", fig.width=9, fig.height=7}

download <- tidy_survey_ordinal %>% 
  filter(area == "ability to download") %>%
  mutate(response = factor(response, levels = c("Made it impossible to download any data", "Made it hard to download data", "This was not an issue", "Not applicable"))) %>%
  group_by(issue) %>%
  count(response)

grouped_bar(download)
  
```

### Data sharing

Data sharing through the NF platform includes not only uploading data but also providing metadata (annotations) for the data, thus this survey section asked about the experience of uploading and using our annotation tools. 

Figure \@ref(fig:fig-sharing-upload) shows that the issue which made upload "hard" or "impossible" for the largest share of users was "confusing or insufficient instructions". 

> Even though other issues affected a smaller share of users, they still represent major blockers for those users who said these made upload "impossible". 

Author: Keeping

This would require both a technological and operational improvement to better combine data upload and annotation. 

Given that data sharing should be prioritized first, the next prioritization chooses between data findability versus data reuse. 
The survey results suggests that data findability affected more users. 
Both search functionality and the user interface are issues to target for data findability. 

```{r fig-all-distributions, fig.label="", fig.width=6.5, fig.height=10, echo=F}

h <- tidy_survey_quant %>%
  mutate(area = gsub("\\(.*", "", area))

ggplot(h, aes(x = rating)) +
  geom_histogram(binwidth=1) + 
  facet_wrap(area ~ ., ncol = 1) +
  theme_light()
```

```{r table-ratings, fig.label="", echo=F}

means <- tidy_survey_quant %>% 
  group_by(area) %>% 
  summarize(mean = round(mean(rating), 2))

 gt(means)

```

## Other discussion

Outside of the main survey, users left comments and suggestions regarding data sharing and the portal. 
One theme hinted at by these qualitative results that were not covered in the above analysis is improving data accessibility to patients.

## Continuing research

> These preliminary results helped to establish a baseline for our community's experience and to recommend the right allocation of resources for improvement. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These preliminary results helped to establish a baseline for our community's experience and to prioritize areas of improvements. 
We aim to focus on the following areas in the near future:
1. Better instructions for data annotation
2. User interface of the portal
3. Lack of search functionality on the portal
3. Data transfer rate and capacity from the Portal UI
```

> Nevertheless, the modest sample sizes could have possibly skewed responses for certain areas and types of users. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

> The [portal survey](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSdSgkq66IoLHbvXNmMEjEg4nMELwM-_CaJK3rFkU9pn84gYuA/viewform) remains open to collect more data. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To improve upon the modest sample sizes in this survey, the [portal survey](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSdSgkq66IoLHbvXNmMEjEg4nMELwM-_CaJK3rFkU9pn84gYuA/viewform) remains open to collect more data. 
```

Author: Applied

> To make it more inclusive we will likely revise the respondent profiling question to include other demographics options. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To make it more inclusive we will revise the respondent profiling question to include other demographics options. 
```

> Aside from getting more trustworthy sample sizes and findings, the continuation of the survey will allow trend analysis to see how experiences change over time. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition to getting more representative sample sizes, the continuation of the survey will allow trend analysis to see how experiences change over time. 
```

Author: Applied

> The results will be integrated into plans for continuous improvement in data discovery, sharing, and reuse as the NF data platform (hopefully) continues to expand and receive investment. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The results will be integrated into plans for continuous improvement in data discovery, sharing, and reuse as the NF data platform continues to expand and receive investment. 
```

Author: Applied

---
title: "NF-OSI Data Access Survey -- 2023 Preliminary Results"
description: |
  Preliminary survey findings from the NF community on the experience of data discovery, sharing, and reuse through the NF Data Portal.
author:
  - name: Anh Nguyet Vu
    url: https://github.com/anngvu
    affiliation: Sage Bionetworks
    affiliation_url: https://sagebionetworks.org/
    orcid_id: 0000-0003-1488-6730
  - name: Jineta Banerjee
    url: https://github.com/jaybee84
    affiliation: Sage Bionetworks
    affiliation_url: https://sagebionetworks.org/
    orcid_id: 0000-0002-1775-3645
  - name: Christina Conrad
    url: https://github.com/cconrad8
    affiliation: Sage Bionetworks
    affiliation_url: https://sagebionetworks.org/
    orcid_id: 0000-0001-8688-2523

>   - name: Robert Allaway

Reviewer 2: added my orcid id

    url: https://github.com/allaway
    affiliation: Sage Bionetworks
    affiliation_url: https://sagebionetworks.org/
    orcid_id: 0000-0003-3573-3565
date: "`r Sys.Date()`"
output: distill::distill_article
---

```{r setup, include=FALSE}
knitr::opts_chunk$set(echo = FALSE)
library(dplyr)
library(tidyr)
library(ggplot2)
library(gt)
library(googlesheets4)
library(tidygraph)
library(ggraph)

source("R/circlepack.R")
```

```{r, include=FALSE}
sheet_id <- "1mZ6_XzC1d82cCl8uBqBjSDvIMo7-QN4Q2_FMIifbmkA"
raw <- googlesheets4::read_sheet(ss = sheet_id)

```

```{r, echo=F}
# users
emails <- raw %>%
  pull(`Email Address`) %>%
  unique()

deid <- setNames(1:length(emails), emails)
survey <- raw %>%
  mutate(id = deid[`Email Address`]) %>%
  select(-c(`Email Address`))

# use only most recent response where some users submitted multiple responses
survey <- survey %>%
   group_by(id)  %>%
   top_n(n = 1, Timestamp)
```

## Introduction

Since 2015, the NF-OSI data platform has continued to grow and is now the entrypoint to over a hundred research studies for the Neurofibromatosis (NF) research community.

> Eight years later, with the support of the Neurofibromatosis Therapeutic Acceleration Program (NTAP), we surveyed NF community members on the experience of **data findability, sharing, and reuse** through the NF Data Portal. The survey aimed evaluate pain points or barriers in these three key areas to understand where the most impactful improvements could be made.

Author: Thanks, applied

## Results and Analysis

> ### Respondent profiles

Reviewer 2: Not a big deal but just wondering if you think it's necessary to have the legend, if the name is in the circles, or vice versa

```{r fig-respondent-type, fig.cap="Demographic representation of survey respondents", layout="l-body-outset", fig.width=9, fig.height=7, echo=F}

# Format labels
survey$`What is your professional title?` <- gsub("Bioinformatician/computational biologist", "Bioinformatician\n/ comp. biologist", survey$`What is your professional title?`)
survey$`What is your professional title?` <- gsub("Bench researcher/staff scientist", "Bench researcher\n/ staff scientist", survey$`What is your professional title?`)
type_representation(`What is your professional title?`, survey)

> ```

Reviewer 2: I would leave the more comment versions on sample size limitations to the end, and just state it as a fact "Here we surveyed 13 members of the NF community"

This would require both a technological and operational improvement to better combine data upload and annotation.

Given that data sharing should be prioritized first, the next prioritization chooses between data findability versus data reuse.
The survey results suggests that data findability affected more users.
Both search functionality and the user interface are issues to target for data findability.

```{r fig-all-distributions, fig.label="", fig.width=6.5, fig.height=10, echo=F}

h <- tidy_survey_quant %>%
  mutate(area = gsub("\\(.*", "", area))

ggplot(h, aes(x = rating)) +
  geom_histogram(binwidth=1) +
  facet_wrap(area ~ ., ncol = 1) +
  theme_light()
```

```{r table-ratings, fig.label="", echo=F}

means <- tidy_survey_quant %>%
  group_by(area) %>%
  summarize(mean = round(mean(rating), 2))

 gt(means)

```

## Other discussion

Outside of the main survey, users left comments and suggestions regarding data sharing and the portal.
One theme hinted at by these qualitative results that were not covered in the above analysis is improving data accessibility to patients.

> ## Continuing research

Reviewer 2: I would suggest a separate section for "study limitations" and then a different section for improvements, so it's clear

Author: Applied

    orcid_id: 0000-0002-1775-3645
  - name: Christina Conrad
    url: https://github.com/cconrad8
    affiliation: Sage Bionetworks
    affiliation_url: https://sagebionetworks.org/
    orcid_id: 0000-0001-8688-2523
  - name: Robert Allaway
    url: https://github.com/allaway
    affiliation: Sage Bionetworks
    affiliation_url: https://sagebionetworks.org/
    orcid_id: 0000-0003-3573-3565
date: "`r Sys.Date()`"
output: distill::distill_article
---

```{r setup, include=FALSE}
knitr::opts_chunk$set(echo = FALSE)
library(dplyr)
library(tidyr)
library(ggplot2)
library(gt)
library(googlesheets4)
library(tidygraph)
library(ggraph)

source("R/circlepack.R")
```

```{r, include=FALSE}
sheet_id <- "1mZ6_XzC1d82cCl8uBqBjSDvIMo7-QN4Q2_FMIifbmkA"
raw <- googlesheets4::read_sheet(ss = sheet_id)

```

```{r, echo=F}
# users
emails <- raw %>%
  pull(`Email Address`) %>%
  unique()

deid <- setNames(1:length(emails), emails)
survey <- raw %>%
  mutate(id = deid[`Email Address`]) %>%
  select(-c(`Email Address`))

# use only most recent response where some users submitted multiple responses
survey <- survey %>%
   group_by(id)  %>%
   top_n(n = 1, Timestamp)
```

## Summary

> The Neurofibromatosis (NF) community survey conducted to assess data findability, sharing, and reuse within the NF Data Portal/Platform has captured feedback from diverse users, with strong representation for Principal Investigators (PIs). Preliminary results indicate that a confusing user interface and poor search functionality were primary obstacles to data findability and affected the most users. Data sharing was particularly hampered by poor instructions and process flow, while data reuse's main issue was data download capacity. Future efforts include getting the perspectives of rare disease patients, as well as conducting more qualitative research. The ongoing survey aims to gather additional data to address limitations in the initial responses and track changes over time.

Reviewer: A few observations here:
1. As written this reads very negative.
2. It would be great to highlight that the next steps would include specific actions towards improvements of the identified areas, and not just more qualitative surveys.

Author: Good points, I revised the summary

h <- tidy_survey_quant %>%
  mutate(area = gsub("\\(.*", "", area))

ggplot(h, aes(x = rating)) +
  geom_histogram(binwidth=1) +
  facet_wrap(area ~ ., ncol = 1) +
  theme_light()
```

```{r table-ratings, fig.label="", echo=F}

medians <- tidy_survey_quant %>%
  group_by(area) %>%
  summarize(median = round(median(rating), 2))

 gt(medians)

```

## Discussion on improvements 

The survey results will be integrated into plans for continuous improvement in data discovery, sharing, and reuse as the NF data platform continues to expand and receive investment. 

We identified that data sharing should be most prioritized. 
The next prioritization chooses between data findability versus data reuse, and the survey results suggest that data findability affected more users. 
Both search functionality and the user interface are issues to target for data findability. 
Respondent comments also indicated that improving data accessibility to patients is also needed for the NF Data Portal.

To improve the data sharing experience, the analysis has already suggested having clearer instructions and making sure they are seen by users. 

> However, user comments also gave the insight that instructions become an issue because the current order/decoupling of events for data sharing is unintuitive -- data annotation should be done with data upload, not after. 

Reviewer 3: Can you add an anonymous quote to support this?

Author: Yep, added
